Yeah, well, to respond to that question,
I don't think I labored on it. I don't think it was in
any particularly anomalous position. I know that
Islin really didn't understand or particularly
value theoretical work. I think some of the
activity that I did during that period, like some
of the field programs I tried to carry out, were in
response to trying to please him.
But he was very suspicious of any kind of
theoretical work at all. I guess that maybe
Walter's recollection of the times or something.
Maybe sometimes I felt a little bit hemmed in and
prevented by the one-man structure of the
institution that we had at that time. Felt a little
bit hemmed in and restricted in things that I could
do. Maybe thought, you know, I didn't have right
access to the ship time or wasn't sufficiently
appreciated or didn't get enough support or
something like that. I think, I think people can
think those things. I don't think it was very
serious and I think, I think I probably did feel
that way with Islam more than with Admiral Smith,
who
I think was very supportive. But it was really,
really often the trouble is not, the trouble is, is
that
is developing a program clearly enough and
specifically enough so that other people can
understand it and can then begin to help support
you to do it. If you're struggling around in a kind
of mental fog yourself, And you don't get very much
support on the outside. That's really not the
other people's fault, it seems to me. Well, you may
think so. It's more your own limitation.
Basically, it seems to me that everything that one
could conceive of that was reasonably decent and
communicable eventually eventually happens,
maybe not, maybe not right away. I think Gislin
didn't support me very much in the Bermuda work. I
think that was a bad period for me, 53, 54. And,
but he probably had some pretty good reasons,
can't argue against.
It would be interesting to know what the
size of the early grants were in the first three
years when I was at Harvard. They probably were
something like $50,000
a year or something like that, I suspect.
because
I think I was probably, I wasn't paying part
of the salary, but I think it was probably, it must
have been something
in that order. What prompted you to move to
Harvard? Oh, temptation. It was a very foolish
thing to do, I think. I think perhaps the, I, when I
was, when I, I enjoyed my time at Yale very much. I
was there some seven years. I liked the academic
life there very much. And although when I came to
Woods Hole, I found Woods Hole a very nice place to
be for the whole 16 years that I was there,
it seemed to me there was sort of something
missing.
There's a narrowness to a purely scientific
institution that you notice if you have been in a
place where before you could talk to lawyers
or historians. It's a very distinct process. And
so when I got this chance to go to Harvard, I really
didn't really want to do it very much, but then I
eventually did do it. And of course, it's a very big
university, and the place, the laboratory where
my offices were, were
completely
immersed in engineering and physics. In fact, the
club is very big, and it would take half a lifetime
to develop contacts with the historians and
artists and so forth. any
kind of a fuzz play. So it's
kind of an impossible thing to recover some kind of
an experience of that kind, I think, at least in the
art of fuzz. It might not be Cambridge England or
something of that sort. I think that was part of the
reason I think probably a large, large, large
fraction of the region. Also, I'd had, I'd had some
nice contacts with some of the people there,
George Carrier in particular was a very
successful, I guess I shared the
supervision of of Alan Robertson's PhD thesis,
which was
a, mine was a pretty nice one, and so I suddenly got
the idea that there were
going to be some
interesting students and people to talk to about
how to work with, and professionally. So that's
what I, that's what I did. I think it probably in the
long run was kind of a mistake because I think it
moved me too far away from work at sea and contact
with ships
and so forth. I mean, if you compare my career to
someone else's who's been single-mindedly
devoted to working at sea, Like some of the people
in Wetzel, or like Swallow, for example, in
England. It's conspicuous and different. It must
have been 5% or 10% of the time that they are doing
the work at sea. It might have been that way anyway,
but I think going to Harvard and MIT was a sure way to
end up that way. Did you go to sea often? Not a great
deal, but I mean, I could see that the, certainly
more than now, and I think,
I think that might have been a, that was a dividing
point, a fork in the road, so to speak, and I think it
would have been interesting to see what it might
have done if I'd taken the other, the other fork in
the road.
Now you say Harvard and MIT. Yeah, well, I'm in MIT
now. That's right. When did you decide to make the
move from Harvard to MIT? In 1963.
And I think
I felt very lonely in Harvard.
Yeah, I guess I felt very isolated over there. And
in fact, all my, well, I guess what really happened
was I went to, before I went to Harvard, I was
working as a kind of adjunct professor at MIT for at
least one year. I think it was one year. And so I'd
known all the people at MIT for a long time, Don
Phillips and Joe Charney and Victor Starr. When I
went to, when I went over to Harvard full time,
there were only a couple of people there that I
really knew. And all the people in the Cambridge
area that I knew were at MIT. So I began to feel kind
of, I began to feel kind of funny. And I began to
question my motives for going to Harvard. To what
degree it was snobbish and things like that. to
which a large extent it is. It's a game which is
played, I think, quite a lot. Everybody tells each
other how good they are. It gets pretty clawing
after a while. So, anyway, it seemed kind of funny
to be over there with all my real contacts and
friends for quite a few years, eight years or
so, over at MIT. And so, you know, I didn't... And it
wasn't a very hard decision for me, which I think
was really a better thing for me to do. It's a very
business-like, sensible, realistic place. And
in the early days I was first there, I had quite a bit
of support from the Draper Laboratory, which was
connected with MIT at that time, which helped some
graduate students through some instrumental and
observational kind of programs. There was no
counterpart to that at that time. I don't remember
how many, but probably five
or six graduate students who were profited very
much by the fact that they were able to do this. It
was a supporting group. They were especially
technical. They helped people build things and
design things. Otherwise, we probably couldn't
have done it. That kind of function, I think, now is
somewhat diminished at MIT on account of the fact
that MIT divested
itself
of the Draybill Laboratory as a result of student
unrest. And so later students now don't have that
quite the same opportunity they had before. And
also, but we still have some kind of coordination.
Carl, why don't you?
but on a more, less
on a student basis,
more
on a project basis. In other words, the people at
the Draper Laboratory aren't helping individual
students with individual projects. It's a big
project, and students can get some kind of work
done, but their primary interest in the project is
not to see a student, which it was before they were
domestic. They still help students a lot, but not
on
an individual basis. Do you remember when you
accepted your first student to work with you? Oh,
yeah. I guess it was before
I went to Harvard. I think it was in 1957, or perhaps
that's when it was. I think it was somebody before
that, but I think it was Robinson. And William
Malkus
and I sort of joined in, except in the summer he came
down as a summer student. At the time we thought he
was very dumb and slow. We just didn't understand
why he took so long to anything to sink in. But he was
just being very thorough. And we talked around for
a long time. It seemed to be very hard to get him
started. And
he took both, the two brothers,
and did a nice thing. He wrote a good thesis. And
basically, he was pretty well trained in
mathematics, so that he had some nice ideas about
similarity solutions and so forth that we never
heard about, to apply to trying to develop a theory
of the thermocline. I think that paper was
published in 1959, but he started working on it in
1957. I'm really quite surprised that we kept
upgrading our assessment of
him all the time. He came down to us all because he
took a kind of descriptive lecture course with
Islam. And Islam brought him down, and when he got
down here, Islam didn't know what to do with him.
And so he just sort of shoved them all up in our
direction. We weren't used to the idea of having
Stewie, so here we had this guy who was supposed to
try to do something. And as we talked, we didn't
seem to know anything, and we didn't think he was
going to do anything. He was going to be a pest, but
he turned out quite differently. In a few weeks, he
began the show. He was asking intelligent
questions. We weren't experienced enough to know
that Stewie was off to turn out and start off that
way.
But you
didn't have many students come into Woods Hole?
Well, I guess not the people who were there
full-time. If you were in the middle 50s, if you
were a professor of physics at Do you
think that I don't want to use the word
intellectual climate, because that's not what I
mean. When you talk about Harvard, you were
talking about what you wanted the intellectual
climate to be. But do you think the
service to an institution, the interchange
between students and faculty improve an
institution? Or do you prefer to be at an
institution which is simply a research
institution?
I think the answer is yes to both of them. I think the
I think
there's
no question that professionally oriented
students have the energy and imagination to
pursue ideas beyond what established people are
willing to do. Partly it's energy, partly it's
because they know the techniques, and partly it's
just because But the, so there ought to be, it's
very important for the students to be in a place
like this. On the other hand, the notion of graphic
institution, I haven't been talking in its whole
life now, it's been a few, not a minute. The notion
of graphic institution has a, seems to me, has a
primary responsibility to do research field work
at sea. And
that universities have students, universities
have computing machines. Some universities have
instrument shops and things like that,
engineering type ones have. But the peculiar
thing about an oceanographic institution is the
fact that it has ships or vehicles which can
transport people out to the ocean and make
measurements, and also technical support groups
that are able to, like, one thing, are capable of
putting more in the balance. So the ability to get
measurements at sea seems to me to be the first
priority of an oceanographic research
institution, whereas a university seems to have
its first priority in education, not scholarly
research. Sometimes at MIT, people start saying,
wouldn't it be a nice place if we didn't have any
students? And they're thinking about how they'd
rather do research than do teaching or
supervision of PhDs. But that doesn't make much
sense in the university. One can see that that's
not the top priority. You try to have a very strong
research program because you feel that that's a
necessary vehicle to educate people at a graduate
level. It's like a medical school has to be
associated with a hospital. But the priority of
the medical school would be to teach doctors even
if they weren't allowed in the hospitals. And the
priority of a research institution like this, a
lot of it, to make measurements at sea, even though
students were banned to come here because we all
had some communicable disease. And so,
unfortunately, we know we don't have to. It isn't
black and white matter. We don't have to make those
black and white choices.
I was thinking more, though, in the sort of change
in the nature of Woods Hole from, although it's
still and always will remain primarily a research
institution. Well, I don't know that, yes it is, I
think. I don't
think that the impact of students on Woods Hole has
been, I don't know how to assess it. There are
students everywhere. I have a feeling that if
there weren't an educational program in Woods
Hole with a dean and so on, there would still be
students here in the summertime. And around. And
the main difference would be that Woods Hole
wouldn't have its name on the degree. But I think
students would... Woods Hole would certainly get
the credit because it would be obvious that the
students had done their work
and so it wouldn't matter whose name was on the
diploma. I think... I think at Woods Hole, for
example, as far as I know, even now, there's no way
that you can tell when you talk to someone at the
institution or look at the institution annual
report who's actually teaching and who's not.
There's no clear distinction between The
large
majority of people in the institution who don't
teach in the ones who do at the university, it's
very clear. Here it's not, and I think probably
it's a good idea. The number of people who actually
give courses here is quite small compared to the
total number of people at the institution. I think
in only one term. Physical
oceanography, there are three or four courses on
it. Maybe that's the most. Maybe two or three in the
physical oceanography department. There must be
several hundred people in the department. So I
don't know, maybe 9 or 15 graduate students. They
don't saturate them. And the absence of students
had nothing to do with your transfer to Harvard and
MIT? Well, it might have at one time. I think
perhaps I was attracted to MIT. Once minds do
change, people
do change over time. When you began to rather
narrow, if I may use that word, your career into
your specialty, was it deliberate? Or did you just
seem to more and more of your energy I
think it's, I think that it's basically, as all the
different, as all the different parts of the
subject become professionalized, each one
becomes more intricate and there is a growing body
of knowledge and you, You can't really, at least I
can't, keep track of all the different
developments. So what you have to do is to say,
either you're going to... Well,
maybe the right thing to say is that maybe one It
only seems so. It's narrowing down a little bit.
Maybe it's just that the field is expanding and
that you, it all depends, your reference point, if
you,
if you, if you, it's a question of some kind of
relativity, I suppose. Either you're getting
smaller or the field is getting bigger, but maybe
both are happening. Or maybe, you know, you just
don't have, maybe on some scale, I would say
chances are that people don't change much in size,
but the field grows.
Probably bigger, probably the most reasonable
judgment. So I think it's probably just a question
of the field becoming more and more
professionalized.
If a person like myself, I think, tries to tries to
look for
new things all the time. Suppose you were a kind of a
hacker carpenter. You might only do the roughing
in work on houses, might you? And when it came to
finishing them up and making them look nice and so
forth like that, the real good cabinet makers and
so forth would have to come along to the job. Well,
that means that the roughing in contractors don't
stand any more job for very long. They have to look
around for new houses that are being built. So I
sort of feel a little bit like a roughing
carpenter. I feel maybe I've done some roughing on
a field, and when that field begins to grow and
become one where certain kinds of skill and care
and
so forth are required, I'm not really equipped to
be able to handle it. Well then,
you know,
I sort
of
have to give up on that house and try something
else. Maybe that's the model of it. I don't know
what kind. I think that's probably very, very,
it's a little odd. So, that's what happens. It does
put the, It does put quite a little bit of burden, it
seems to me, on the government. It's got to kind of
look around all the time and find people who want to
build houses. The other guys haven't got such a bad
time because the houses are already going to start
and people want to finish them. But it's just the
way my life has been, I'm afraid. Comments on your
early colleagues here at Woods Hole? Whom do you
remember about what they were doing,
particularly favorably or unfavorably? Oh, I
think I've learned a great deal from many
people here. Ewing gave me the opportunity to go to
taste what small boat work like was at sea
in the wintertime. Spine gave me an opportunity to
learn something about tools and working
machine shops, which I think has always been a
source of pleasure for me. Wyman, Jeffrey Wyman,
gave me an idea about how to, more than anyone else I
guess, how to do how to
build a
construct of thought processes, some kind of a,
how to put together some ideas. Woodcock, Al
Woodcock gave me a taste, not very natural, it
doesn't come too naturally to me, but it gave me a
very good taste, I think, of the naturalist's view
of the world. how to find something of
interest, and
the simplest kind of love that people
don't seem to notice. And if you look around, you
can find them. Woodcock was wonderful that way.
Ray Montgomery. gave me some kind of a standard
of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, scholar-ness, I guess you'd
call it. The kind of scientist who, uh, who, uh, is
careful about what he reads and what he writes and,
uh, uh, prudes, uh, some sense of the... gave me
some introductions to
professionals in meteorology that I wouldn't
have had from any of the others. I met Rossby
from... Rossby, I guess, gave me the first
indication... I met Rossby in 1946. Rossby gave me
the first an indication of how very, how very, how
you could learn something from the most vastly
simplified theoretical models. You know,
maximum simplification is what I learned, what I
think I learned from Rosby.
Of course, I mean, I can't go very beyond maximum
simplification. I can't make things very
complicated, so maximum simplification is a very
useful thing. But I think I really learned that,
you know, to strip things down from him. You could
learn, certainly, in his simple things, most
simple models that we construct. So I guess I may
have left... I may have left some people out, but I
think that brings me up to about, I think it brings
me up to around 1954, 1955. It probably touches the
main, main contacts that I had with the
group that I think affected me in significant
ways.
I guess from that time on,
I was probably about 35 or something like that.
Probably not so strongly affected by other people
so much in the same kind of way that determines what
your career personality
is going to be like. Whom did you ask to read your
first paper? in criticizing?
Fort Wyman, I think. Probably, probably, you
know, I think the first paper I wrote was a terrible
paper that I wrote for some New York Academy's
meeting with, with Fort Wyman, and
It was
kind of an awful paper. He didn't seem to like it
that much. And then my Cumulus Cloud paper, I
guess, 1947, he stimulated to a large extent. And
I guess
I guess Wyman was my main contact.